Proposal of the semantic highlighting protocol extension (#367)
microsoft/vscode-languageserver-node: protocol/src/protocol.semanticHighlighting.proposed.md

#### Semantic Highlighting

> While the syntax highlighting is done on the client-side and can handle keywords, strings, and other low-level tokens from the grammar, it cannot adequately support complex coloring. Semantic highlighting information is calculated on the language server and pushed to the client as a notification. This notification carries information about the ranges that have to be colored. The desired coloring details are given as [TextMate scopes](https://manual.macromates.com/en/language_grammars) for each affected range. For the semantic highlighting information the following additions are proposed:

Reviewer: It seems desirable to provide a way for the client to say "Send this range of text to a different language server if one is available", e.g. to provide a way to implement https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/issues/1751 (see https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/issues/77140#issuecomment-533953100 as well). This would allow, for example, an HTML language server to parse `onclick="event.preventDefault()"` and say "If a Javascript language server is available, hand it the `event.preventDefault()` text and let it parse that text instead". Other use cases where reparsing by a different language server would be useful include (but are not limited to):

* HTML in a string literal in a PHP file
* CSS in a `<style>` element in an HTML page
* SQL in a string literal in many different languages
* Markdown inside comments in many different languages
* Code embedded in Markdown in literate-programming documentation, Python `doctest` tests, etc

The common factor in all the above examples is that the "root" language server can identify the range of text in which a different language is embedded, and (usually) which language is embedded in that range. Therefore, one possible scope the language server may want to return is one with the meaning "Please make another semantic-highlighting request to a different language server that serves language XYZ, for this range of text".

To enable this scenario without making any change to the current protocol proposal, I propose a new root-level TextMate scope (in addition to `comment`, `keyword`, `string`, et al): `reparse`. A client that does not know about the `reparse` scope would ignore it; a client that understands it would understand a `reparse.language.markdown` scope as meaning "take the text in this range, and send it to a Markdown language server for parsing".

Since scopes (as seen below) are a 2D array, the scope that includes `reparse.language.markdown` could also include a second scope name that would be a fallback if no Markdown language server is available (e.g., if no editor extension is installed that provides Markdown parsing). This is most likely to be either a string or a comment. E.g., if entry 4 in the `scopes` array is `['reparse.language.markdown', 'string.quoted']` and entry 5 is `['reparse.language.markdown', 'comment.line.number-sign']`, then `"*bold*"` would return scope 4 while `# *bold*` would return scope 5.

There are other ways that https://github.com/microsoft/vscode/issues/1751 could be implemented in this API, such as adding a new `reparse` capability so that clients can signal whether or not they understand reparse messages, but that would involve a change in the API and might therefore hinder implementation by extensions that have already started to implement this. So I think a new top-level TextMate scope is probably the simplest way to achieve multi-language parsing.

Reviewer 2: Highlighting and injection seems orthogonal to me. You'd want JS code completion in `"event.preventDefault()"`, and it would be strange if completion would have to block on syntax highlighting of the whole file. 

Rather, we need a special "document/languageInjections" request/notification, which returns something like this:

```TypeScript
interface InjectionInfo {
    language: string,
    range: Range,
    // We often want to strip leading indent or `//` from the injected fragment, 
    // `rangeMapping` should do that. An example would be like this
    // ```javascript
    // console.log({
    //   key: "<- that '//' is not a part of javascript snippet!"
    // })
    // ```
    rangeMapping?: Map<Range, Range>, 
    // Sometimes, just removing some ranges is not enough, 
    // a full string escaping might be required
    //
    //    onclick="console.log(&quotHello World!&quot)"
    textContent?: string
}
```

Reviewer 3: >   // Sometimes, just removing some ranges is not enough, 
    // a full string escaping might be required
    //
    //    onclick="console.log(&quot;Hello World!&quot;)"
    textContent?: string

I don't think this is enough either - how does the `secondary` language server know how `textContent` was reached.

<details>
<summary>Demonstration</summary>
For the purposes of example take a pathological case where `&quot;` actually expands to `Hello World! ` in the `onclick` handler. A more realistic scenario would probably involve some backslashes

In this case, `console.log(&quot;Hello World!&quot;)` in the document would lead to a `textContent` of `console.log(Hello World! Hello World! Hello World! )`.

When hovering or typing at `Hello <|>World` in the document, how does the client know that the hover position know that the cursor position should be `31` [`console.log(Hello World! Hello <|>World! Hello World! )`] - from its perspective the one of the `&quot;`s may have expanded to each of ` ` or `Hello World! Hello World!`.
</details>

I think we need to make `rangeMapping` more general, i.e. replace it with a `TextEdit[]`, remove `textContent` and add an (optional?) `InjectionEncodeId`.

This would be passed in the `InjectionEncode` request, which is `InjectionEncodeParams -> TextEdit[]`, which turns 'in Injection' `TextEdit`s to 'out of Injection' `TextEdit`s.
```ts
interface InjectionEncodeParams {
	id: InjectionEncodeId, // Probably `number`
	edits: TextEdit[],
}
```

<details>
<summary>Worked Example</summary>

In the case of `onclick="console.log(&quot;Hello World!&quot;)"`, assuming that this is the entire document, the request would be:
`[server->client notification] "document/languageInjections"`

```jsonc
{
    "injections": [
        {
            "language": "javascript",
            "range": {
                "start": {
                    // Just after the open quote
                },
                "end": {
                    //Just after the close quote
                }
            },
            "edits": [
                {
                    "range": {
                        // Around the first `&quot;`
                    },
                    "newText": "\""
                },
                {
                    "range": {
                        // Around the second `&quot;`

                    },
                    "newText": "\""
                }
            ],
            "id": 0 // Some ID
        }
    ]
}
```

If the user then typed an edit (or accepted a completion) at "Hello <|>World", the client would make `InjectionEncode` request. This would (html) escape any quotes in the edit to be made for example.

N.B. I ran out of time to type out the request and responses in detail for this case.
</details>

Also, I think we would need some way of passing some sort of argument into this Injection, for example for Json Schemas for a sub file.

_Client Capabilities_:

Capability that has to be set by the language client if it can accept and process the semantic highlighting information received from the server.

```ts
/**
 * The text document client capabilities.
 */
textDocument?: {

	/**
	 * The client's semantic highlighting capability.
	 */
	semanticHighlightingCapabilities?: {

		/**
		 * `true` if the client supports semantic highlighting support text documents. Otherwise, `false`. It is `false` by default.
		 */
		semanticHighlighting: boolean;

	}

}
```

_Server Capabilities_:

If the client declares its capabilities with respect to the semantic highlighting feature, and if the server supports this feature too, the server should set all the available TextMate scopes as a "lookup table" during the `initialize` request.

```ts
/**
 * Semantic highlighting server capabilities.
 */

> semanticHighlighting?: {

Reviewer 4: Also note that instead of directly referencing a `{ }` instance, you should probably create and refer to a separate, new `SemanticHighlightingOptions` interface kind of like `DocumentLinkOptions` or `DocumentOnTypeFormattingOptions`.

	/**
	 * A "lookup table" of semantic highlighting [TextMate scopes](https://manual.macromates.com/en/language_grammars)
	 * supported by the language server. If not defined or empty, then the server does not support the semantic highlighting
	 * feature. Otherwise, clients should reuse this "lookup table" when receiving semantic highlighting notifications from
	 * the server.
	 */

> 	scopes?: string[][];

Reviewer 5: I had a look at the link in the comment, but I still don't understand what this 2D array is expected to contain.

I assume every top-level element of the array represents one semantic highlighting scope, and the indexes encoded in the `tokens` string index into that top-level array.

If each of those top-level elements is itself an array of strings, what goes into those arrays? The name of the scope, which is one string... and what else?

Perhaps an example would help clarify the intended usage.

Reviewer 5: Ok, I think I shed some light on this by looking at the [Java language server's implementation](https://github.com/eclipse/eclipse.jdt.ls/blob/6819b791a7f5d83e583dd830fd2a7f6948e5e80c/org.eclipse.jdt.ls.core/src/org/eclipse/jdt/ls/core/internal/highlighting/SemanticHighlightings.java#L69).

IIUC, every semantic highlighting token kind has multiple scopes associated with it, ordered from most specific to least specific. For example, "static method" in Java has:

```
"storage.modifier.static.java", "entity.name.function.java", "meta.function-call.java", "meta.method.body.java", "meta.method.java", "meta.class.body.java", "meta.class.java",
"source.java"
```

That seems like an awful lot of scopes to me, but I guess the general idea is that it allows clients to use both coarse-grained token kinds (e.g. "static method" will match "function", so if a client is configured to highlight functions with a particular color, that will be applied to static methods) and fine-grained token kinds (if a client has a more specific color configured for "static methods", then that will take precedence over the color configured for functions).

Let me know if I'm understanding this correctly.

Reviewer 6: As another implementer on the client side, I also have questions as to how this should be handled. @HighCommander4 when you say 

> every semantic highlighting token kind has multiple scopes associated with it

how does this relate to the definition of a token below? In the Encoding of Tokens section it says that a token has only a single scope index. How does this then map into the 2D space defined here?

When looking at the clangd server side output e.g. I see that the scopes array is 1D in practice anyways:

```
[["variable.other.cpp"],["entity.name.function.cpp"],["entity.name.function.method.cpp"],["variable.other.field.cpp"],["entity.name.type.class.cpp"],["entity.name.type.enum.cpp"],["variable.other.enummember.cpp"],["entity.name.namespace.cpp"],["entity.name.type.template.cpp"]]
```

Does someone know a server side implementation that produces a 2D array?

Reviewer 5: > Does someone know a server side implementation that produces a 2D array?

This [Java server implementation](https://github.com/eclipse/eclipse.jdt.ls/blob/6819b791a7f5d83e583dd830fd2a7f6948e5e80c/org.eclipse.jdt.ls.core/src/org/eclipse/jdt/ls/core/internal/highlighting/SemanticHighlightings.java#L69) (which I also linked to in the comment that you're replying to) does. The line I link to contains a list of multiple scope strings associated with a single token kind, `staticFinalField`.

> As another implementer on the client side, I also have questions as to how this should be handled. @HighCommander4 when you say
> 
> > every semantic highlighting token kind has multiple scopes associated with it
> 
> how does this relate to the definition of a token below? In the Encoding of Tokens section it says that a token has only a single scope index. How does this then map into the 2D space defined here?

My understanding is that, after indexing into the 2D array with the scope index, the intention is for the client to loop through the resulting 1D array, which is expected to be ordered from "most specific" to "least specific" scope, and use the first one that has a matching style in the user's theme.

So, taking the `staticFinalField` example above, the client would first try the scope `"storage.modifier.static.java"`, and if that matches a style in the user's theme, then apply that. Otherwise, keep looping and try the next scope. This way, even if the user's theme didn't contain a more specific rule (e.g. one for static variables), they'll still get a coloring for a less specific one (e.g. one for variables).

}
```

##### SemanticHighlighting Notification

> The `textDocument/semanticHighlighting` notification is pushed from the server to the client to inform the client about additional semantic highlighting information that has to be applied on the text document. It is the server's responsibility to decide which lines are included in the highlighting information. In other words, the server is capable of sending only a delta information. For instance, after opening the text document (`DidOpenTextDocumentNotification`) the server sends the semantic highlighting information for the entire document, but if the server receives a `DidChangeTextDocumentNotification`, it pushes the information only about the affected lines in the document.

Reviewer 5: Since this is a server-to-client notification, should the protocol be called `textDocument/publishSemanticHighlighting`, to be consistent with `textDocument/publishDiagnostics`?

> The `textDocument/semanticHighlighting` notification is pushed from the server to the client to inform the client about additional semantic highlighting information that has to be applied on the text document. It is the server's responsibility to decide which lines are included in the highlighting information. In other words, the server is capable of sending only a delta information. For instance, after opening the text document (`DidOpenTextDocumentNotification`) the server sends the semantic highlighting information for the entire document, but if the server receives a `DidChangeTextDocumentNotification`, it pushes the information only about the affected lines in the document.

Reviewer 7: Can the name be shortened to `textDocument/publishSemanticHighlight`? `highlight` can also be used as a noun and the naming would be consistent with `documentHighlight`.

> The server never sends delta notifications, if no new semantic highlighting ranges were introduced but the existing onces have been shifted. For instance, when inserting a new line to the very beginning of the text document. The server receives the `DidOpenTextDocumentNotification`, updates its internal state, so that the client and the server shares the same understanding about the highlighted positions but the server does not send any notifications to the client. In such cases, it is the client's responsibility to track this event and shift all existing markers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The server will not send delta notifications if no new semantic highlighting ranges were introduced but the existing ones have simply been shifted. For instance, when inserting a new line to the very beginning of the text document. The server receives the `DidOpenTextDocumentNotification`, updates its internal state, so that the client and the server shares the same understanding about the highlighted positions but the server does not send any notifications to the client. In such cases, it is the client's responsibility to track this event and shift all existing markers.
```

The server can send a `SemanticHighlightingInformation` to the client without defining the `tokens` string. This means, the client must discard all semantic highlighting information in the line. For instance when commenting out a line.

_Notification_:

> * method: 'workspace/semanticHighlighting'

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* method: 'textDocument/semanticHighlighting'
```
I assume this should be `textDocument/semanticHighlighting` instead based on what's on line 52?

* params: `SemanticHighlightingParams` defined as follows:

```ts
/**
 * Parameters for the semantic highlighting (server-side) push notification.
 */
export interface SemanticHighlightingParams {

	/**
	 * The text document that has to be decorated with the semantic highlighting information.
	 */

> 	textDocument: VersionedTextDocumentIdentifier;

Reviewer 4: All existing requests use `TextDocumentIdentifier` instead of a `VersionedTextDocumentIdentifier`. What is the reasoning behind making this a `VersionedTextDocumentIdentifier` instead?

Note that I'm not necessarily challenging this because I too have made a similar suggestion in the past regarding the pull model in a [different issue](https://github.com/Microsoft/language-server-protocol/issues/358#issuecomment-376845468).

	/**
	 * An array of semantic highlighting information.
	 */
	lines: SemanticHighlightingInformation[];

}

/**
 * Represents a semantic highlighting information that has to be applied on a specific line of the text document.
 */
export interface SemanticHighlightingInformation {

	/**
	 * The zero-based line position in the text document.
	 */
	line: number;

	/**
	 * A base64 encoded string representing every single highlighted characters with its start position, length and the "lookup table" index of
	 * of the semantic highlighting [TextMate scopes](https://manual.macromates.com/en/language_grammars).
	 * If the `tokens` is empty or not defined, then no highlighted positions are available for the line.
	 */
	tokens?: string;

}
```

> _Tokens_:

Reviewer 6: could this section please make the binary encoding of the base64 encoded data more explicit?

Basically the following things are missing in my opinion:
- the encoded string represents an array of 64-bit sized tokens
- size of the token string is thus size of the decoded string divided by 8
- what endianness is used for the unsigned integers in the token? system default? can we make this explicit and enforce little endian, assuming one can in principle run a lsp server on a big endian machine and connect to it from a little endian client or vice versa?

Reviewer 6: regarding endianness, it seems to be defined as big endian, cf. clangd source:

```
     // Writes the token to LineByteTokens in the byte format specified by the
      // LSP proposal. Described below.
      // |<---- 4 bytes ---->|<-- 2 bytes -->|<--- 2 bytes -->|
      // |    character      |  length       |    index       |

      write32be(Token.R.start.character, OS);
      write16be(Token.R.end.character - Token.R.start.character, OS);
      write16be(static_cast<int>(Token.Kind), OS);
```

> Tokens are encoded in a memory friendly way straight from the wire. The `tokens` string encapsulates multiple tokens as a `base64` encoded string. A single semantic highlighting token can be interpreted as a range with additional TextMate scopes information. The following properties can be inferred from a single token: `character` is the zero-based offset where the range starts. It is represented as a 32-bit unsigned integer. The `length` property is the length of the range a semantic highlighting token. And finally, it also carries the TextMate `scope` information as an integer between zero and 2<sup>16</sup>-1 (inclusive) values. Clients must reuse the `scopes` "lookup table" from the `initialize` request if they want to map the `scope` index value to the actual TextMate scopes represented as a string.

Reviewer 5: At the start of the line, since we already know what line this token string pertains to. I agree that the spec could be more explicit about this.

_Client Capabilities_:

Capability that has to be set by the language client if that can accept and process the semantic highlighting information received from the server.

```ts
/**
 * The text document client capabilities.
 */
workspace: {

	/**
	 * `true` if the client has the semantic highlighting support for the text document. Otherwise, `false`. It is `false` by default.
	 */
	semanticHighlighting?: boolean;
}
```

##### SemanticHighlighting Notification

The `textDocument/semanticHighlighting` notification is pushed from the server to the client to inform the client about additional semantic highlighting information that has to be applied on the text document.

> 

Reviewer 8: It should explain that incremental updates are done on a line-by-line basis.

	 * An array of semantic highlighting information.
	 */
	lines: SemanticHighlightingInformation[];

}

/**
 * Represents a semantic highlighting information that has to be applied on a specific line of the text document.
 */
export interface SemanticHighlightingInformation {

	/**
     * The zero-based line position in the text document.
     */
	line: number;

	/**
	 * An array of highlighting tokens for the current line in the text document.
	 */
	tokens: SemanticHighlightingToken[];

}

/**
 * Representation of a single semantic highlighting token that has to be applied on a line of the text document.
 */
export interface SemanticHighlightingToken {

	/**
     * The zero-based character offset on the line in a text document where this token applies. If negative, defaults to `0`.
	 * If greater than the length of the current line, defaults to the end of the line.
     */
	character: number;

	/**
	 * The length of the token. If negative, defaults to `0`. If the sum of the `character` and the `length` exceeds the length of the line,
	 * it defaults back to the end of the line.
	 */
	length: number;

	/**
	 * An array of semantic highlighting scopes for the current token.
	 */

> 	scopes: string[];

Reviewer 8: Documentation should point out that this corresponds to TextMate scopes. https://manual.macromates.com/en/language_grammars

#### Semantic Highlighting

While the syntax highlighting are done on the client-side and can handle keywords, strings, and other low-level tokens from the grammar, it cannot adequately support complex coloring. Semantic highlighting information is calculated on the language server and pushed to the client as a notification. This notification carries information about the ranges that have to be colored. The desired coloring details are given as [TextMate scopes](https://manual.macromates.com/en/language_grammars) for each affected range. For the semantic highlighting information the following additions are proposed:

_Client Capabilities_:

> Capability that has to be set by the language client if that can accept and process the semantic highlighting information received from the server.

Reviewer 4: `if that can` should be `if it can`.

```ts
/**
 * The text document client capabilities.
 */

> workspace: {

Reviewer 4: I think you meant to name this variable `textDocument`?

	/**

> 	 * `true` if the client has the semantic highlighting support for the text document. Otherwise, `false`. It is `false` by default.

Reviewer 4: `true` if the client has the semantic highlighting support for the text document.
...to...
`true` if the client supports semantic highlighting support text documents.

	 */
	semanticHighlighting?: boolean;
}
```

##### SemanticHighlighting Notification

The `textDocument/semanticHighlighting` notification is pushed from the server to the client to inform the client about additional semantic highlighting information that has to be applied on the text document. It is the server's responsibility to decide which lines are included in the highlighting information. In other words, the server is capable of sending only a delta information. For instance, after opening the text document (`DidOpenTextDocumentNotification`) the server sends the semantic highlighting information for the entire document, but if the server receives a `DidChangeTextDocumentNotification`, it pushes the information only about the affected lines in the document.

_Notification_:

> * method: 'workspace/semanticHighlighting'

Reviewer 9: should this be `textDocument/semanticHighlighting` ?
